# WIT APIs

## High-level Overview

Kinode OS runs processes that are WebAssembly components, as discussed [elsewhere](./processes.md#wasm-and-kinode).
Two key advantages of WebAssembly components are

1. The declaration of types and functions using the cross-language Wasm Interface Type (WIT) language
2. The composibility of components.
See discussion [here](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/why-component-model.html).

Kinode processes make use of these two advantages.
Processes within a package — a group of processes, also referred to as an app — may define an API in WIT format.
Each process defines a [WIT `interface`](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html#interfaces); the package defines a [WIT `world`](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html#interfaces).
The API is published alongside the package.
Other packages may then import and depend upon that API, and thus communicate with the processes in that package.
The publication of the API also allows for easy inspection by developers or by machines, e.g., LLM agents.

More than types can be published.
Because components are composable, packages may publish, along with the types in their API, library functions that may be of use in interacting with that package.
When set as as a dependency, these functions will be composed into new packages.
Libraries unassociated with packages can also be published and composed.

## WIT for Kinode

The following is a brief discussion of the WIT language for use in writing Kinode package APIs.
A more full discussion of the WIT language is [here](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html).

### Conventions

WIT uses `kebab-case` for multi-word variable names.
WIT uses `// C-style comments`.

Kinode package APIs must be placed in the top-level `api/` directory.
They have a name matching the `PackageId` and appended with a version number, e.g.,
```
$ tree chat
chat
├── api
│   └── chat:template.os-v0.wit
...
```

### What WIT compiles into

WIT compiles into types of your preferred language.
Kinode currently recommends Rust, but also supports Python and Javascript, with plans to support C/C++ and JVM languages like Java, Scala, and Clojure.
You can see the code generated by your WIT file using the [`wit-bindgen` CLI](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wit-bindgen).
For example, to generate the Rust code for the `app_store` API, use, e.g.,
```
kit b app_store
wit-bindgen rust -w app-store-sys-v0 --generate-unused-types --additional_derive_attribute serde::Deserialize app_store/target/wit
```

In the case of Rust, `kebab-case` WIT variable names become `UpperCamelCase`.

Rust `derive` macros can be applied to the WIT types in the `wit_bindgen::generate!` macro that appears in each process.
A typical macro invocation looks like
```rust
wit_bindgen::generate!({
    path: "target/wit",
    world: "chat-template-dot-os-v0",
    generate_unused_types: true,
    additional_derives: [serde::Deserialize, serde::Serialize],
});
```
where the field of interest here is the `additional_derives`.

### Types

[The built-in types of WIT](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html#built-in-types) closely mirror Rust's types, with the exception of sets and maps.
Users can define `struct`-like types called [`record`](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html#records)s, and `enum`-like types called [`variant`](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html#variants)s.
Users can also define [`func`](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html#functions)s with function signatures.

### Interfaces

[`interface`s](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html#interfaces) define a set of types and functions and, in Kinode, are how a process signals its API.

### Worlds

[`world`s](https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html#worlds) define a set of `import`s and `export`s and, in Kinode, correspond to a package's API.
They can also `include` other `world`s, copying that `world`s `import`s and `export`s.
An `export` is an `interface` that a package defines and makes available, while an `import` is an `interface` that must be made available to the package.
If an `interface` contains only types, the presence of the WIT file is enough to provide that interface: the types can be generated from the WIT file.
However, if an `import`ed `interface` contains `func`s as well, a Wasm component is required that `export`s those functions.
For example, consider the `chat` template's `test/` package (see [`kit` installation instructions](../kit/install.md#getting-kit)):

```
kit n chat
cat chat/test/chat_test/api/*
```

Here, `chat-template-dot-os-v0` is the `test/` package `world`.
It `import`s types from `interface`s defined in two other WIT files.
