# Identity System

One of the most important features of a peer-to-peer network is the ability to maintain a unique and persistent identity. This identity must be self-sovereign, unforgeable, and easy to share and index on (TODO: clarify). Uqbar uses a domain system similar to [ENS](https://ens.domains/) to achieve this.

Like ENS, Uqbar domains (so far we're calling our system `QNS` (TODO: how do we feel about this sort of informality? Is this just a place holder, or is this sort of language common in other docs? My instinct is to just write as if it is final and change later if necessary)) are registered by a wallet and owned in the form of an NFT. However, unlike ENS, Uqbar domains never expire, and they contain metadata necessary to both: demonstrate the provenance of a given identity and route messages to the identity on the Uqbar network.

What does this look like? It's easy enough to check for provenance of a given identity. If you have a Uqbar domain, you can prove that you own it by signing a message with the wallet that owns it. However, to essentially use your Uqbar identity as a domain name for your personal server, QNS domains have routing information, similar to a DNS record, that points to an IP address.

A QNS domain can either be `direct` or `indirect`. When users first boot a node, they may decide between these two domain types and set networking information using a transaction (TODO: calrify). Direct nodes share their literal IP address and port in their metadata, allowing other nodes to message them directly. Again, this is like registering a WWW domain name and pointing it at your web server. However, running a node like this is both technically demanding and a security risk (TODO: why?), so indirect nodes are the best choice for the majority of users that choose to run their own node (TODO: are there users who won't use either an indirect or direct node?).

Instead of sharing their IP and port, indirect nodes simply post a list of *routers* onchain. These routers are other *direct* nodes that have agreed to forward messages to indirect nodes. When a node wants to send a message to an indirect node, it first looks up the node onchain, then sends the message to one of the routers listed in the node's metadata. The router is responsible for forwarding the message to the indirect node and similarly forwarding messages from that node back to the network at large.

For more information about the architectural specifics of the networking protocol, see [Networking Protocol](./networking_protocol.md). The main takeway for the dentity system is that *domain provenance* and *domain resolution* are unified by QNS.

We recognize that users may wish to operate under one of a massive variety of identities, some of which have existed for years. The great thing about NFT-based identities is that they are composable. There are a number of tools to do this (TODO: what is the THIS here?), the most basic of which revolve around simply grouping together multiple ID NFTs by nature of them being in the same wallet (TODO: exactly what you are "doing" here isn't very clear to me—is it using multiple linked identities?). QNS provides the utility of Uqbar networking, but can and should be paired with existing identity solutions (TODO: examples?) for things like profile images, social reputation, and more.(TODO: I think this whole paragraph needs a revision for clarity)

Like .eth for ENS, the QNS domain space is fixed inside the `.uq` top-level domain. However, we reserve the ability to expand domain availability in the future, and governance of the Uqbar protocol will include the ability to manage domain names. Eventually, we hope to link various TLDs to existing NFT communities and other identity systems.